This lecture was about board control (with an extra bit about bluffing and
challenging - see the last few slides). The main concepts were:

- Open vs. closed boards
- Controlling the board's variability
- Board conditions for exchanging
- First move placement

1. Open vs. closed boards

The overall condition of a Scrabble board can be characterized along a spectrum
from open to closed. An open board is one where there are many spots to play,
many playable bonus squares, and/or accessible stretches of 7 or more open
squares suitable for placing a bingo (called bingo lanes). A closed board is
the opposite. Generally, it's easier to score more points on an open board than
on a closed board. This is true for both you and your opponent; consequently,
the more open the board, the greater the variability in expected score
difference over several turns. Why? Because, as we've all experienced, luck
ultimately has a large influence on how many points we score. We might get
great luck and play several bingos, or we might get all vowels and have to
exchange for zero points. If the board is open, i.e. amenable to high-scoring
plays, good luck will very likely yield high scores and bad luck will yield low
scores. But if the board is closed, then even with good tiles we probably won't
be able to score highly; there is less score variability based on drawing luck.
Thus we say that open boards have greater score variability. Understanding,
evaluating, and making plays to control this variability is a subtle but
important skill for good Scrabble playing.

2. Controlling the board's variability

There are several reasons why you might want to use your plays to push the
board towards one end of the spectrum of open or closed (I'll sometimes use
these terms adverbially and call this "playing open" or "playing closed"):

  1. For one, you may just prefer to play on open boards or closed boards. If
  you are good at anagramming for bingos, you probably prefer open boards where
  there are many lanes to place bingos. On the other hand, if you know lots of
  short words and are great at finding compact parallel plays, you may prefer
  closed boards where you can utilize those skills. So your personal playing
  style may affect whether you choose to push the board towards being open or
  closed. You should also, though, think about the opponent's playing style,
  whether you know it in advance or you detect it by observing the way they
  play. Forcing the opponent to play on a board which doesn't match their
  preferred style could be to your advantage.

  2. Your and your opponent's relative skill levels should influence how you
  choose to play. The better your opponent than you, in particular the greater
  your opponent's word knowledge than yours, the more closed you should tend to
  play. The more opportunities available, the more your opponent's greater
  vocabulary or skill will enable them to outplay you.

  3. The current score should be the biggest factor in whether you choose to
  play open or closed. When leading significantly (70-100 points), it often
  makes sense to close up the board to reduce the variability. Remember that
  more open boards permit greater variability in score: over the course of 3
  turns, for instance, you might gain 100 points over your opponent, or
  vice-versa. If you can instead close the board so that the greatest possible
  spread swing is 30, then you can essentially guarantee that your opponent
  will not surmount your lead. Similarly, when you're significantly behind, you
  should strive to open up the board to increase the variability. While this
  also increases your opponent's potential for scoring, it may be the only way
  for you to have any chance of winning the game. You should always be vigilant
  of the board's condition and, especially, what your opponent is doing to it.
  As soon as you notice your opponent closing up the board to guarantee their
  lead (whether it's intentional or not), you should fight with everything you
  have to keep it open. Once the board is very closed, it's extremely hard for
  the player who's behind to open it up, because any opening you try to make
  your opponent will quickly shut down.  So what does opening or closing the
  board actually entail? If you understand the definitions of open and closed,
  this should be deducible. To open the board, strive to create hot spots and
  bingo lanes. To close the board, get rid of the same (preferably by using
  them). When opening the board, keep in mind that your opponent will get the
  first shot at whatever you open up. It's best if you can create multiple
  openings, or an opening that, if you opponent were to use it, would create
  another opening in the process.

Understand that controlling the board is not a separate task from your usual
goal of accumulating points. Ideally, you'd like to make plays that score well,
yield good leaves, AND push the board towards your desired conditions. It's
another factor to think about when evaluating plays, and unlike leave values,
it's something that requires a broader perspective - perhaps information about
the previous few turns, and predictions about the next few, as well as the
score - to evaluate.

3. Board conditions for exchanging

I want to particularly examine how this additional factor affects our exchange
plays. Let's suppose we have a really bad rack; e.g. ACEIIRU. We definitely
want to exchange. However, if the board has one particularly glaring opening,
like an S on 1E with the TWS open, exchanging will mean giving this huge
opportunity up to our opponent. Although exchanging would be our typical
choice, with these conditions we might be forced to play something on the TWS,
just to keep our opponent from fetching a huge score there. On the flip side,
if the board is very closed, with few opportunities for you or your opponent to
score well, then you should be even more willing to exchange. You know that
your opponent won't be landing any huge plays on big openings, so there's not
much loss in giving up a turn to improve your rack.

One common position that's often a good time to exchange is the starting
position. This may seem counterintuitive, and/or just lame to start the game by
not playing any tiles, but it's often the best play when you start with a lousy
rack. The starting position can be considered a pretty closed board - there's
one DWS (the center square) and one DLS that can be reached, but you're limited
to exactly those bonuses and no more. Once you make your play, you tend to open
up several more hot spots for your opponent. Thus, the first move position is
actually quite a bad one. Unless you have a play that scores pretty well and
yields a good leave, it's usually better to exchange for a better rack and let
your opponent deal with this troublesome position. Your opponent may very
likely respond by exchanging and giving it back to you, but hopefully your
exchange gives you a rack good enough to play it. If not, you know what to
do... exchange again! Just keep in mind that 6 zero-score plays in a row ends
the game, turning it into a "who's got lower tiles" contest, which you might
win, but probably don't want to risk.

4. First move placement

Assuming you get a rack good enough to warrant playing the first tiles of the
game, you can follow a few rules (unusual for Scrabble, but since this position
is so standard, its analysis is as well) to decide how to place your play. You
have to cover the center DWS square, and whether you play horizontally or
vertically doesn't matter, since the board is rotationally symmetric. The
important factors to consider are the positions of the surrounding bonus
squares. Generally, you should follow this thought process:

  - If you can make a 5+ letter word, place the highest-value consonant you can
    on a DLS.
  - Otherwise, or if there's a tie between multiple options, prefer the play
    which places less vowels under the two DLS near the center. Between vowels,
    prefer placing the harder to use ones under the DLS; i.e., prefer to place
    U > O > I > A > E under the DLS, if you have to place a vowel under them.

Importantly, the second consideration is subordinate to the first. If you can
place a high-point consonant on a DLS but it requires placing vowels under the
central DLS, do it still. The defensive effects of avoiding placing vowels
under the DLS is enough to be a tiebreaker, but still very small. Even 2 extra
points generally outweighs it.
